from the waves, took her seat upon the raft. 

"My poor good man," said she, "why is Neptune so furiously angry with
you? He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster
he will not kill you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as
I bid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim
to the Phaecian coast where better luck awaits you. And here, take
my veil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can
come to no harm so long as you wear it. As soon as you touch land
take it off, throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then
go away again." With these words she took off her veil and gave it
him. Then she dived down again like a sea-gull and vanished beneath
the dark blue waters. 

But Ulysses did not know what to think. "Alas," he said to himself
in his dismay, "this is only some one or other of the gods who is
luring me to ruin by advising me to will quit my raft. At any rate
I will not do so at present, for the land where she said I should
be quit of all troubles seemed to be still a good way off. I know
what I will do- I am sure it will be best- no matter what happens
I will stick to the raft as long as her timbers hold together, but
when the sea breaks her up I will swim for it; I do not see how I
can do any better than this." 

While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave
that seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over
the raft, which then went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry
chaff tossed about by a whirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank
and rode upon it as if he were on horseback; he then took off the
clothes Calypso had given him, bound Ino's veil under his arms, and
plunged into the sea- meaning to swim on shore. King Neptune watched
him as he did so, and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying,
"'There now, swim up and down as you best can till you fall in with
well-to-do people. I do not think you will be able to say that I have
let you off too lightly." On this he lashed his horses and drove to
Aegae where his palace is. 

But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all
the winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused
a good stiff breeze from the North that should lay the waters till
Ulysses reached the land of the Phaeacians where he would be safe.

Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water,
with a heavy swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but
when the third day broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm
without so much as a breath of air stirring. As he rose on the swell
he looked eagerly ahead, and could see land quite near. Then, as children
rejoice when their dear father begins to get better after having for
a long time borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but
the gods deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when he again
saw land and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might
once more set foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot,
he began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the
swell still broke against them with a terrific roar. Everything was
enveloped in spray; there were no harbours where a ship might ride,
nor shelter of any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and
mountain tops. 

Ulysses' heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly to
himself, "Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that
I had given up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the
coast is rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer
from the sea, with deep water close under them so that I cannot climb
out for want of foothold. I am afraid some great wave will lift me
off my legs and dash me against the rocks as I leave the water- which
would give me a sorry landing. If, on the other hand, I swim further
in search of some shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry
me out to sea again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some
great monster of the deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many
such, and I know that Neptune is very angry with me." 

While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with
such force against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn
to pieces if Minerva had not shown him what to do. He caught hold
of the rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till
the wave retired, so he was saved that time; but presently the wave
came on again and carried him back with it far into the sea-tearing
his hands as the suckers of a polypus are torn when some one plucks
it from its bed, and the stones come up along with it even so did
the rocks tear the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew
him deep down under the water. 

Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his
own destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about
him. He swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating
against the land, and at the same time he kept looking towards the
shore to see if he could find some haven, or a spit that should take
the waves aslant. By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of
a river, and here he thought would be the best place, for there were
no rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. He felt that there
was a current, so he prayed inwardly and said: 

"Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of
the sea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has
lost his way has at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore
in my distress I draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees
of your riverhood. Have mercy upon me, O king, for I declare myself
your suppliant." 

Then the god stayed his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm
before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Here
at last Ulysses' knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had
completely broken him. His body was all swollen, and his mouth and
nostrils ran down like a river with sea-water, so that he could neither
breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently,
when he had got his breath and came to himself again, he took off
the scarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the salt stream
of the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave
that bore it towards her. Then he left the river, laid himself down
among the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth. 

"Alas," he cried to himself in his dismay, "what ever will become
of me, and how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bed
through the long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the
bitter cold and damp may make an end of me- for towards sunrise there
will be a keen wind blowing from off the river. If, on the other hand,
I climb the hill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some
thicket, I may escape the cold and have a good night's rest, but some
savage beast may take advantage of me and devour me." 

