I mean you no sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly
what I should do myself in your place. I am dealing with you quite
straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and I am very sorry
for you." 

When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and Ulysses
followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on and on
till they came to Calypso's cave, where Ulysses took the seat that
Mercury had just left. Calypso set meat and drink before him of the
food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar for
herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before
them. When they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink, Calypso
spoke, saying: 

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own
land at once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how
much suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own
country, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and
let me make you immortal, no matter how anxious you may be to see
this wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after
day; yet I flatter myself that at am no whit less tall or well-looking
than she is, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman should
compare in beauty with an immortal." 

"Goddess," replied Ulysses, "do not be angry with me about this. I
am quite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or so
beautiful as yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are an immortal.
Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothing else. If
some god wrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it and make the
best of it. I have had infinite trouble both by land and sea already,
so let this go with the rest." 

Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired
into the inner part of the cave and went to bed. 

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Ulysses put
on his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light
gossamer fabric, very fine and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle
about her waist and a veil to cover her head. She at once set herself
to think how she could speed Ulysses on his way. So she gave him a
great bronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides,
and had a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. She
also gave him a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of
the island where the largest trees grew- alder, poplar and pine, that
reached the sky- very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for
him in the water. Then, when she had shown him where the best trees
grew, Calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which he soon finished
doing. He cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring
them by rule in good workmanlike fashion. Meanwhile Calypso came back
with some augers, so he bored holes with them and fitted the timbers
together with bolts and rivets. He made the raft as broad as a skilled
shipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he filed a deck on
top of the ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it. He also made a mast
with a yard arm, and a rudder to steer with. He fenced the raft all
round with wicker hurdles as a protection against the waves, and then
he threw on a quantity of wood. By and by Calypso brought him some
linen to make the sails, and he made these too, excellently, making
them fast with braces and sheets. Last of all, with the help of levers,
he drew the raft down into the water. 

In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso
sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean
clothes. She gave him a goat skin full of black wine, and another
larger one of water; she also gave him a wallet full of provisions,
and found him in much good meat. Moreover, she made the wind fair
and warm for him, and gladly did Ulysses spread his sail before it,
while he sat and guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder.
He never closed his eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on late-setting
Bootes, and on the Bear- which men also call the wain, and which turns
round and round where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping
into the stream of Oceanus- for Calypso had told him to keep this
to his left. Days seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the
eighteenth the dim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of
the Phaeacian coast appeared, rising like a shield on the horizon.

But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight
of Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He could
see him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged
his head and muttered to himself, saying, heavens, so the gods have
been changing their minds about Ulysses while I was away in Ethiopia,
and now he is close to the land of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed
that he shall escape from the calamities that have befallen him. Still,
he shall have plenty of hardship yet before he has done with it."

Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred
it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows
till earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth
out of the heavens. Winds from East, South, North, and West fell upon
him all at the same time, and a tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses'
heart began to fail him. "Alas," he said to himself in his dismay,
"what ever will become of me? I am afraid Calypso was right when she
said I should have trouble by sea before I got back home. It is all
coming true. How black is Jove making heaven with his clouds, and
what a sea the winds are raising from every quarter at once. I am
now safe to perish. Blest and thrice blest were those Danaans who
fell before Troy in the cause of the sons of Atreus. Would that had
been killed on the day when the Trojans were pressing me so sorely
about the dead body of Achilles, for then I should have had due burial
and the Achaeans would have honoured my name; but now it seems that
I shall come to a most pitiable end." 

As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the
raft reeled again, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He
let go the helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that
it broke the mast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into
the sea. For a long time Ulysses was under water, and it was all he
could do to rise to the surface again, for the clothes Calypso had
given him weighed him down; but at last he got his head above water
and spat out the bitter brine that was running down his face in streams.
In spite of all this, however, he did not lose sight of his raft,
but swam as fast as he could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed
on board again so as to escape drowning. The sea took the raft and
tossed it about as Autumn winds whirl thistledown round and round
upon a road. It was as though the South, North, East, and West winds
were all playing battledore and shuttlecock with it at once.

When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called Leucothea,
saw him. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been since raised
to the rank of a marine goddess. Seeing in what great distress Ulysses
now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like a sea-gull
