poor Ulysses is to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods
nor men, but after a perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he
is to reach fertile Scheria, the land of the Phaeacians, who are near
of kin to the gods, and will honour him as though he were one of ourselves.
They will send him in a ship to his own country, and will give him
more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought back from
Troy, if he had had had all his prize money and had got home without
disaster. This is how we have settled that he shall return to his
country and his friends." 

Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did
as he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals
with which he could fly like the wind over land and sea. He took the
wand with which he seals men's eyes in sleep or wakes them just as
he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over Pieria; then he swooped
down through the firmament till he reached the level of the sea, whose
waves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing every hole and
corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray.
He flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to
the island which was his journey's end, he left the sea and went on
by land till he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.

He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth,
and one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and
sandal wood. As for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her
golden shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. Round her
cave there was a thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress
trees, wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests- owls,
hawks, and chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the
waters. A vine loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly
about the mouth of the cave; there were also four running rills of
water in channels cut pretty close together, and turned hither and
thither so as to irrigate the beds of violets and luscious herbage
over which they flowed. Even a god could not help being charmed with
such a lovely spot, so Mercury stood still and looked at it; but when
he had admired it sufficiently he went inside the cave. 

Calypso knew him at once- for the gods all know each other, no matter
how far they live from one another- but Ulysses was not within; he
was on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with
tears in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso
gave Mercury a seat and said: "Why have you come to see me, Mercury-
honoured, and ever welcome- for you do not visit me often? Say what
you want; I will do it for be you at once if I can, and if it can
be done at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before
you. 

As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and
mixed him some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had
enough, and then said: 

"We are speaking god and goddess to one another, one another, and
you ask me why I have come here, and I will tell you truly as you
would have me do. Jove sent me; it was no doing of mine; who could
possibly want to come all this way over the sea where there are no
cities full of people to offer me sacrifices or choice hecatombs?
Nevertheless I had to come, for none of us other gods can cross Jove,
nor transgress his orders. He says that you have here the most ill-starred
of alf those who fought nine years before the city of King Priam and
sailed home in the tenth year after having sacked it. On their way
home they sinned against Minerva, who raised both wind and waves against
them, so that all his brave companions perished, and he alone was
carried hither by wind and tide. Jove says that you are to let this
by man go at once, for it is decreed that he shall not perish here,
far from his own people, but shall return to his house and country
and see his friends again." 

Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, "You gods," she exclaimed,
to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealous and hate seeing
a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with him in open
matrimony. So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion, you precious
gods were all of you furious till Diana went and killed him in Ortygia.
So again when Ceres fell in love with Iasion, and yielded to him in
a thrice ploughed fallow field, Jove came to hear of it before so
long and killed Iasion with his thunder-bolts. And now you are angry
with me too because I have a man here. I found the poor creature sitting
all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck his ship with lightning
and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were drowned, while
he himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island. I got fond
of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him immortal,
so that he should never grow old all his days; still I cannot cross
Jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insists
upon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send him
anywhere myself for I have neither ships nor men who can take him.
Nevertheless I will readily give him such advice, in all good faith,
as will be likely to bring him safely to his own country."

"Then send him away," said Mercury, "or Jove will be angry with you
and punish you"' 

On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses,
for she had heard Jove's message. She found him sitting upon the beach
with his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home-sickness;
for he had got tired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep
with her in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have
it so. As for the day time, he spent it on the rocks and on the sea-shore,
weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon
the sea. Calypso then went close up to him said: 

"My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your
life out any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will;
so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with
an upper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. I will put
bread, wine, and water on board to save you from starving. I will
also give you clothes, and will send you a fair wind to take you home,
if the gods in heaven so will it- for they know more about these things,
and can settle them better than I can." 

Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. "Now goddess," he answered, "there
is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help
me home when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on
a raft. Not even a well-found ship with a fair wind could venture
on such a distant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall mage
me go on board a raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean
me no mischief." 

Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: "You know a
great deal," said she, "but you are quite wrong here. May heaven above
and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx-
and this is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take- that
