she took her seat, she called Ulysses: 

"Stranger," said she, "rise and let us be going back to the town;
I will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I
can tell you that you will meet all the best people among the Phaecians.
But be sure and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person.
As long as we are going past the fields- and farm lands, follow briskly
behind the waggon along with the maids and I will lead the way myself.
Presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find
a high wall running all round it, and a good harbour on either side
with a narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn
up by the road side, for every one has a place where his own ship
can lie. You will see the market place with a temple of Neptune in
the middle of it, and paved with large stones bedded in the earth.
Here people deal in ship's gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails,
and here, too, are the places where oars are made, for the Phaeacians
are not a nation of archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows,
but are a sea-faring folk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars,
and ships, with which they travel far over the sea. 

"I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against
me later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low
fellow, if he met us, might say, 'Who is this fine-looking stranger
that is going about with Nausicaa? Where did she End him? I suppose
she is going to marry him. Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she
has taken from some foreign vessel, for we have no neighbours; or
some god has at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers,
and she is going to live with him all the rest of her life. It would
be a good thing if she would take herself of I for sh and find a husband
somewhere else, for she will not look at one of the many excellent
young Phaeacians who are in with her.' This is the kind of disparaging
remark that would be made about me, and I could not complain, for
I should myself be scandalized at seeing any other girl do the like,
and go about with men in spite of everybody, while her father and
mother were still alive, and without having been married in the face
of all the world. 

"If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help
you home, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars
by the road side dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow
all round it. Here my father has a field of rich garden ground, about
as far from the town as a man' voice will carry. Sit down there and
wait for a while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach
my father's house. Then, when you think we must have done this, come
into the town and ask the way to the house of my father Alcinous.
You will have no difficulty in finding it; any child will point it
out to you, for no one else in the whole town has anything like such
a fine house as he has. When you have got past the gates and through
the outer court, go right across the inner court till you come to
my mother. You will find her sitting by the fire and spinning her
purple wool by firelight. It is a fine sight to see her as she leans
back against one of the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind
her. Close to her seat stands that of my father, on which he sits
and topes like an immortal god. Never mind him, but go up to my mother,
and lay your hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. If
you can gain her over, you may hope to see your own country again,
no matter how distant it may be." 

So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.
The mules drew well and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.
She was careful not to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were
following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with
judgement. As the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove
of Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter
of Jove. 

"Hear me," he cried, "daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable,
hear me now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wrecking
me. Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friends
and be hospitably received by the Phaecians." 

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not
show herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune,
who was still furious in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting
home. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VII

Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the
town. When she reached her father's house she drew up at the gateway,
and her brothers- comely as the gods- gathered round her, took the
mules out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while
she went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira,
lit the fire for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from
Apeira, and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was
king over the Phaecians, and the people obeyed him as though he were
a god. She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for
her, and brought her supper for her into her own room. 

Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed
a thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaecians
who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was. Then, as
he was just entering the town, she came towards him in the likeness
of a little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in front of him,
and Ulysses said: 

"My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous?
I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in
your town and country." 

Then Minerva said, "Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house
you want, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will
go before you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and
do not look at any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here
cannot abide strangers, and do not like men who come from some other
place. They are a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace
of Neptune in ships that glide along like thought, or as a bird in
the air." 

On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not
one of the Phaecians could see him as he passed through the city in
the midst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will
towards him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired
their harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of
the city, which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking,
and when they reached the king's house Minerva said: 

"This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show
