gone off in nothing but my shirt and shield. When the night was two-thirds
through and the stars had shifted their their places, I nudged Ulysses
who was close to me with my elbow, and he at once gave me his ear.

"'Ulysses,' said I, 'this cold will be the death of me, for I have
no cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but
my shirt, and I do not know what to do.' 

"Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following
plan: 

"'Keep still,' said he in a low voice, 'or the others will hear you.'
Then he raised his head on his elbow. 

"'My friends,' said he, 'I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep.
We are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and
tell Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.' 

"On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
till morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in
those days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak
both out of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier;
but now people look down upon me because my clothes are shabby."

And Eumaeus answered, "Old man, you have told us an excellent story,
and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning
you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for we
have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has only
one. When Ulysses' son comes home again he will give you both cloak
and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go." 

With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some goatskins
and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here Ulysses lay
down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak that he
kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.

Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the
swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready
to go and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his property
during his master's absence. First he slung his sword over his brawny
shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also took
the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of attack
from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where the pigs
were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
the North wind. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XV

But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses'
son that he was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping
in the forecourt of Menelaus's house; Pisistratus was fast asleep,
but Telemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy
father, so Minerva went close up to him and said: 

"Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer,
nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house;
they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have
been on a fool's errand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if
you wish to find your excellent mother still there when you get back.
Her father and brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus,
who has given her more than any of the others, and has been greatly
increasing his wedding presents. I hope nothing valuable may have
been taken from the house in spite of you, but you know what women
are- they always want to do the best they can for the man who marries
them, and never give another thought to the children of their first
husband, nor to their father either when he is dead and done with.
Go home, therefore, and put everything in charge of the most respectable
woman servant that you have, until it shall please heaven to send
you a wife of your own. Let me tell you also of another matter which
you had better attend to. The chief men among the suitors are lying
in wait for you in the Strait between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean
to kill you before you can reach home. I do not much think they will
succeed; it is more likely that some of those who are now eating up
your property will find a grave themselves. Sail night and day, and
keep your ship well away from the islands; the god who watches over
you and protects you will send you a fair wind. As soon as you get
to Ithaca send your ship and men on to the town, but yourself go straight
to the swineherd who has charge your pigs; he is well disposed towards
you, stay with him, therefore, for the night, and then send him to
Penelope to tell her that you have got back safe from Pylos."

Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus
with his heel to rouse him, and said, "Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke
the horses to the chariot, for we must set off home." 

But Pisistratus said, "No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive
in the dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought
his presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good-bye
to us in the usual way. So long as he lives a guest should never forget
a host who has shown him kindness." 

As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen,
leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he
put on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his
shoulders, and went out to meet him. "Menelaus," said he, "let me
go back now to my own country, for I want to get home." 

And Menelaus answered, "Telemachus, if you insist on going I will
not detain you. not like to see a host either too fond of his guest
or too rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting
a man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if
he would like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he
is in the house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then,
till I can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till
you have yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient
dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once
more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting
out on such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making
a tour in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and
will conduct you myself through all our principal cities. No one will
send us away empty handed; every one will give us something- a bronze
tripod, a couple of mules, or a gold cup." 

"Menelaus," replied Telemachus, "I want to go home at once, for when
I came away I left my property without protection, and fear that while
