tattered old clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall,
they reached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with
a strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper
by the sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having
drawn my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where
I struck out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore
near a thick wood in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at
my having escaped and went searching about for me, till at last they
thought it was no further use and went back to their ship. The gods,
having hidden me thus easily, then took me to a good man's door- for
it seems that I am not to die yet awhile." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Poor unhappy stranger,
I have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting,
but that part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me
to believe it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in
this way? I know all about the return of my master. The gods one and
all of them detest him, or they would have taken him before Troy,
or let him die with friends around him when the days of his fighting
were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his
ashes and his son would have been heir to his renown, but now the
storm winds have spirited him away we know not whither. 

"As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go
to the town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some
news about Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both
those who grieve over the king's absence, and those who rejoice at
it because they can eat up his property without paying for it. For
my own part I have never cared about asking anyone else since the
time when I was taken in by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and
come a long way till at last he reached my station, and I was very
kind to him. He said he had seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the
Cretans, refitting his ships which had been damaged in a gale. He
said Ulysses would return in the following summer or autumn with his
men, and that he would bring back much wealth. And now you, you unfortunate
old man, since fate has brought you to my door, do not try to flatter
me in this way with vain hopes. It is not for any such reason that
I shall treat you kindly, but only out of respect for Jove the god
of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying you." 

Ulysses answered, "I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have
given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make
a bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your
master comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send
me to Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say
he will, set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder
precepice, as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling
lies." 

"And a pretty figure I should cut then," replied Eumaeus, both now
and hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut
and showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good
earnest if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will
come in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper."

Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with
the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their sties, and
a tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them.
But Eumaeus called to his men and said, "Bring in the best pig you
have, that I may sacrifice for this stranger, and we will take toll
of him ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding
pigs, while others reap the fruit of our labour." 

On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a
fine fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus
did not forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the
first thing he did was to cut bristles from the pig's face and throw
them into the fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses
might return home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of
oak which he had kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and
stunned it, while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then they
cut it up, and Eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint
on to some of the fat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid
upon the embers; they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces
upon the spits and roasted them till they were done; when they had
taken them off the spits they threw them on to the dresser in a heap.
The swineherd, who was a most equitable man, then stood up to give
every one his share. He made seven portions; one of these he set apart
for Mercury the son of Maia and the nymphs, praying to them as he
did so; the others he dealt out to the men man by man. He gave Ulysses
some slices cut lengthways down the loin as a mark of especial honour,
and Ulysses was much pleased. "I hope, Eumaeus," said he, "that Jove
will be as well disposed towards you as I am, for the respect you
are showing to an outcast like myself." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Eat, my good fellow, and
enjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that,
just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses."

As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt sacrifice
to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, put the
cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion. Mesaulius
brought them their bread; the swineherd had bought this man on his
own account from among the Taphians during his master's absence, and
had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the good
things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat
and drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they
all went to bed after having made a hearty supper. 

Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon.
It poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West,
which is a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus,
in the excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak
and give it him, or make one of his men give him one. "Listen to me,"
said he, "Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I
will tell you something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this
way; wine will make even a wise man fall to singing; it will make
him chuckle and dance and say many a word that he had better leave
unspoken; still, as I have begun, I will go on. Would that I were
still young and strong as when we got up an ambuscade before Troy.
Menelaus and Ulysses were the leaders, but I was in command also,
for the other two would have it so. When we had come up to the wall
of the city we crouched down beneath our armour and lay there under
cover of the reeds and thick brush-wood that grew about the swamp.
It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the snow fell small
and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated thick with rime.
The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept comfortably enough
with their shields about their shoulders, but I had carelessly left
my cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too cold, and had
