looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that something
valuable has been stolen during my absence." 

When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants
to prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house.
At this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had
just got up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some
meat, which he at once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant
store room, not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When
he reached the place where the treasures of his house were kept, he
selected a double cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also
a silver mixing-bowl. Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she
kept the lovely dresses which she had made with her own hands, and
took out one that was largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery;
it glittered like a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest.
Then they all came back through the house again till they got to Telemachus,
and Menelaus said, "Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno,
bring you safely home according to your desire. I will now present
you with the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house.
It is a mixing-bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid
with gold, and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians
made me a present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while
I was on my return home. I should like to give it to you."

With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus,
while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing-bowl and set it before
him. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.

"I too, my son," said she, "have something for you as a keepsake from
the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go
back rejoicing to your own country and to your home." 

So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly.
Then Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them
all as he did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus
into the house, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant
brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into
a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean
table beside them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered
them many good things of what there was in the house. Eteoneus carved
the meat and gave them each their portions, while Megapenthes poured
out the wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that
were before them, but as soon as they had had had enough to eat and
drink Telemachus and Pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their
places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and
under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court, and Menelaus came
after them with a golden goblet of wine in his right hand that they
might make a drink-offering before they set out. He stood in front
of the horses and pledged them, saying, "Farewell to both of you;
see that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind
to me as any father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before
Troy." 

"We will be sure, sir," answered Telemachus, "to tell him everything
as soon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses
returned when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very
great kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents
I am taking with me." 

As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand- an eagle with
a great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the
farm yard- and all the men and women were running after it and shouting.
It came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands
in front of the horses. When they saw it they were glad, and their
hearts took comfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, "Tell me,
Menelaus, has heaven sent this omen for us or for you?" 

Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him
to make, but Helen was too quick for him and said, "I will read this
matter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it
will come to pass. The eagle came from the mountain where it was bred
and has its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelled
far and suffered much, will return to take his revenge- if indeed
he is not back already and hatching mischief for the suitors."

"May Jove so grant it," replied Telemachus; "if it should prove to
be so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when
I am at home." 

As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed
through the town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon
their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and
darkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles
lived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. There they passed
the night and were treated hospitably. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their
places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and
under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus lashed
his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came
to Pylos, and then Telemachus said: 

"Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask
you. You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we
are both of an age, and this journey has brought us together still
more closely; do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me
there, for if I go to your father's house he will try to keep me in
the warmth of his good will towards me, and I must go home at once."

Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end
he deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus's
beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel.
Then he said, "Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also
before I can reach home to tell my father. I know how obstinate he
is, and am sure he will not let you go; he will come down here to
fetch you, and he will not go back without you. But he will be very
angry." 

With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians
and soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together
and gave his orders. "Now, my men," said he, "get everything in order
on board the ship, and let us set out home." 

Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But
as Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva
in the ship's stern, there came to him a man from a distant country,
a seer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He
was descended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of
sheep; he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into
exile by the great and powerful king Neleus. Neleus seized his goods
