Supposing that with Jove's and your assistance I succeed in killing
them, I must ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their
avengers when it is all over." 

"For shame," replied Minerva, "why, any one else would trust a worse
ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less
wise than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout
in all your troubles? I tell you plainly that even though there were
fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you should
take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you. But
go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you
shall be out of your troubles before long." 

As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to Olympus.

While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that
eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting
up in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping
she prayed to Diana saying, "Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove,
drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch
me up and bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the
mouths of overflowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus.
The daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods
killed them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took care of them,
and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them to
excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them
an imposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of
accomplishment; but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see
Jove about getting them married (for well does he know both what shall
happen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came and
spirited them away to become handmaids to the dread Erinyes. Even
so I wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide me from mortal
sight, or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain go even
beneath the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses
only, and without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was.
Besides, no matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put
up with it so long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are
closed in slumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery
haunts me even in my dreams. This very night methought there was one
lying by my side who was like Ulysses as he was when he went away
with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no dream,
but the very truth itself." 

On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping,
and it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and
was by his side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on
which he had lain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he
took the bullock's hide out into the open. He lifted up his hands
to heaven, and prayed, saying "Father Jove, since you have seen fit
to bring me over land and sea to my own home after all the afflictions
you have laid upon me, give me a sign out of the mouth of some one
or other of those who are now waking within the house, and let me
have another sign of some kind from outside." 

Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high
up among the from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad when
he heard it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from
hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another
sign. There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind
wheat and barley which are the staff of life. The others had ground
their task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet
finished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard
the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master.
"Father Jove," said she, "you who rule over heaven and earth, you
have thundered from a clear sky without so much as a cloud in it,
and this means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of
me your poor servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very
last day that the suitors dine in the house of Ulysses. They have
worn me out with the labour of grinding meal for them, and I hope
they may never have another dinner anywhere at all." 

Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman's
speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should
avenge himself on the suitors. 

Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about
his shoulder, bound his sandals on his comely feet, and took a doughty
spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the threshold
of the cloister and said to Euryclea, "Nurse, did you make the stranger
comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let him shift
for himself?- for my mother, good woman though she is, has a way of
paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting others
who are in reality much better men." 

"Do not find fault child," said Euryclea, "when there is no one to
find fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he
liked: your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and
he said he would not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants
to make one for him, but he said he was re such wretched outcast that
he would not sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having
an undressed bullock's hide and some sheepskins put for him in the
cloister and I threw a cloak over him myself." 

Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans
were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was
not alone, for his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the
maids and said, "Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and
sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the
seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean
out the mixing-jugs and the cups, and for water from the fountain
at once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early,
for it is a feast day." 

Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily
to work about the house. The men who were in attendance on the suitors
also came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women returned
from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three
best pigs he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises,
and then he said good-humouredly to Ulysses, "Stranger, are the suitors
treating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?"

"May heaven," answered Ulysses, "requite to them the wickedness with
which they deal high-handedly in another man's house without any sense
of shame." 

Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up,
for he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors' dinner;
and he had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the
