and three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when
I saw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly
as I could: 'Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give
me, therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this
is what my father and mother and my friends have always called me.'

"But the cruel wretch said, 'Then I will eat all Noman's comrades
before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the
present that I will make him.' 

As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon
him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets
of human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk.
Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and
encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When
the wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of
the fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven
had filled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the
beam into the monster's eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight
I kept turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in
a ship's plank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap
can keep on turning as long as they choose. Even thus did we bore
the red hot beam into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all
over it as we worked it round and round, so that the steam from the
burning eyeball scalded his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of
the eye sputtered in the fire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet
into cold water to temper it- for it is this that gives strength to
the iron- and it makes a great hiss as he does so, even thus did the
Cyclops' eye hiss round the beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells
made the cave ring again. We ran away in a fright, but he plucked
the beam all besmirched with gore from his eye, and hurled it from
him in a frenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did so to the other
Cyclopes who lived on the bleak headlands near him; so they gathered
from all quarters round his cave when they heard him crying, and asked
what was the matter with him. 

"'What ails you, Polyphemus,' said they, 'that you make such a noise,
breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being
able to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no
man is trying to kill you either by fraud or by force? 

"But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, 'Noman is killing
me by fraud! Noman is killing me by force!' 

"'Then,' said they, 'if no man is attacking you, you must be ill;
when Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better
pray to your father Neptune.' 

"Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my
clever stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain,
felt about with his hands till he found the stone and took it from
the door; then he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front
of it to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might
be foolish enough to attempt this. 

"As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my
own life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one
who knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great.
In the end I deemed that this plan would be the best. The male sheep
were well grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them
noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which
the wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man under the
middle sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that
there were three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram
finer than any of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back,
esconced myself in the thick wool under his belly, and flung on patiently
to his fleece, face upwards, keeping a firm hold on it all the time.

"Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came,
but when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male
sheep hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about
the pens waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting;
but their master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the
sheep as they stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out
that the men were underneath their bellies. As the ram was going out,
last of all, heavy with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty
self; Polyphemus laid hold of it and said: 

"'My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave
this morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but
lead the mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain,
and are the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last
of all. Is it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are
sorry because that wicked Noman and his horrid crew have got him down
in his drink and blinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you
could understand and talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding,
and I would dash his brains upon the ground till they flew all over
the cave. I should thus have some satisfaction for the harm a this
no-good Noman has done me.' 

"As spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way
out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram's belly,
and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat,
by constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive
them down to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of
us who had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops
had killed. However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning
that they were to hush their crying, and told them to get all the
sheep on board at once and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took
their places, and smote the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I
had got as far out as my voice would reach, I began to jeer at the
Cyclops. 

"'Cyclops,' said I, 'you should have taken better measure of your
man before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up
your visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin
would find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished
you.' 

"He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from
off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that
it was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked
as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried
us back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. But
I snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my
men by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon
they laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were
before, I was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged
and prayed of me to hold my tongue. 
