it so much to heart even if you are dead.' 

"'Say not a word,' he answered, 'in death's favour; I would rather
be a paid servant in a poor man's house and be above ground than king
of kings among the dead. But give me news about son; is he gone to
the wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me
also if you have heard anything about my father Peleus- does he still
rule among the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout
Hellas and Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could
I but stand by his side, in the light of day, with the same strength
that I had when I killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of
Troy- could I but be as I then was and go even for a short time to
my father's house, any one who tried to do him violence or supersede
him would soon me it.' 

"'I have heard nothing,' I answered, 'of Peleus, but I can tell you
all about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from
Scyros with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was
always first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and
I were the only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting
on the plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men,
but would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many
a man did he kill in battle- I cannot name every single one of those
whom he slew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only
say how he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who
was the handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also
of the Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman's bribes. Moreover,
when all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus
had made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open
the door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders
and chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking
in every limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from
his cheek; he was all the time urging me to break out from the horse-
grasping the handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing
fury against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he
got his handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such
is the fortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown
spear nor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great
chance.' 

"When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across
a meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning
the prowess of his son. 

"The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own
melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof-
still angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about
the armour of Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the
Trojan prisoners and Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never
gained the day in such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who
was foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in
stature and prowess. 

"When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, 'Ajax, will you not
forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
hateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough
to lose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you
as much as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the
blame be laid on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against
the Danaans, for it was this that made him counsel your destruction-
come hither, therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and
hear what I can tell you.' 

"He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts;
nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being
so angry, or I should have gone talking to him, only that there were
still others among the dead whom I desired to see. 

"Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his
sentences upon them. 

"After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the
ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and
he had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.

"And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering
some nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were
digging their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat
them off with his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove's
mistress Leto as she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.

"I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that
reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink,
it dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground-
parched by the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that
shed their fruit over his head- pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet
figs and juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out
his hand to take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to
the clouds. 

"And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
with both his hands. With hands and feet he' tried to roll it up to
the top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over
on to the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the
pitiless stone would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then
he would begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran
off him and the steam rose after him. 

"After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for
he is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to
wife, who is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming
round him like scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as
night with his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string,
glaring around as though ever on the point of taking aim. About his
breast there was a wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous
fashion with bears, wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there
was also war, battle, and death. The man who made that belt, do what
he might, would never be able to make another like it. Hercules knew
me at once when he saw me, and spoke piteously, saying, my poor Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, are you too leading the same sorry kind of life
that I did when I was above ground? I was son of Jove, but I went
through an infinity of suffering, for I became bondsman to one who
was far beneath me- a low fellow who set me all manner of labours.
He once sent me here to fetch the hell-hound- for he did not think
he could find anything harder for me than this, but I got the hound
out of Hades and brought him to him, for Mercury and Minerva helped
me.' 
