one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to
see what his wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long time
she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked
him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his
shabby clothes and failed to recognize him, till Telemachus began
to reproach her and said: 

"Mother- but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name-
why do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit
by his side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No
other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come
back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through
so much; but your heart always was as hard as a stone." 

Penelope answered, "My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can
find no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them.
I cannot even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really is
Ulysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand
one another better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two
are alone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others."

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, "Let your mother put
me to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else,
because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed
another, even though he was not one who would leave many friends to
take up his quarrel, the man who has killed him must still say good
bye to his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing
the stay of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would
have you consider this matter." 

"Look to it yourself, father," answered Telemachus, "for they say
you are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other
mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right
good will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength
holds out." 

"I will say what I think will be best," answered Ulysses. "First wash
and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room
and dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre,
so that if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some
one going along the street happens to notice it, they may think there
is a wedding in the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors
will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon
my own land. Once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven
vouchsafes us shall seem wisest." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed
and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took
his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance.
The house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the
people outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting married
at last. She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to
protect her husband's property until he comes home." 

This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had
been happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses
in his own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made
him look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow
thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth
blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a
skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva-
and his work is full of beauty- enriches a piece of silver plate by
gilding it. He came from the bath looking like one of the immortals,
and sat down opposite his wife on the seat he had left. "My dear,"
said he, "heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than
woman ever yet had. No other woman could bear to keep away from her
husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence,
and after having gone through so much. But come, nurse, get a bed
ready for me; I will sleep alone, for this woman has a heart as hard
as iron." 

"My dear," answered Penelope, "I have no wish to set myself up, nor
to depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very
well remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that
he himself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding
upon it with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets." 

She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, "Wife,
I am much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been
taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found
it a hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some
god came and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however
strong and in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it
is a marvellous curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There
was a young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full
vigour, and about as thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round
this with strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made
the doors strong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of
the olive tree and left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly
from the root upwards and then worked with carpenter's tools well
and skilfully, straightening my work by drawing a line on the wood,
and making it into a bed-prop. I then bored a hole down the middle,
and made it the centre-post of my bed, at which I worked till I had
finished it, inlaying it with gold and silver; after this I stretched
a hide of crimson leather from one side of it to the other. So you
see I know all about it, and I desire to learn whether it is still
there, or whether any one has been removing it by cutting down the
olive tree at its roots." 

When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
down. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck,
and kissed him. "Do not be angry with me Ulysses," she cried, "you,
who are the wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven
has denied us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing
old, together; do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did
not embrace you thus as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering
all the time through fear that someone might come here and deceive
me with a lying story; for there are many very wicked people going
about. Jove's daughter Helen would never have yielded herself to a
man from a foreign country, if she had known that the sons of Achaeans
would come after her and bring her back. Heaven put it in her heart
to do wrong, and she gave no thought to that sin, which has been the
source of all our sorrows. Now, however, that you have convinced me
by showing that you know all about our bed (which no human being has
ever seen but you and I and a single maid servant, the daughter of
Actor, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who keeps
the doors of our room) hard of belief though I have been I can mistrust
