no longer." 

Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and
faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men
who are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their
ship with the fury of his winds and waves- a few alone reach the land,
and these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves
on firm ground and out of danger- even so was her husband welcome
to her as she looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair
arms from about his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging
their sorrow till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined
otherwise, and held night back in the far west, while she would not
suffer Dawn to leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and
Phaethon that bear her onward to break the day upon mankind.

At last, however, Ulysses said, "Wife, we have not yet reached the
end of our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo.
It is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus
the shade of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I
went down into Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions.
But now let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed
boon of sleep." 

"You shall go to bed as soon as you please," replied Penelope, "now
that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your
country. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell
me about the task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about
it later, so it is better that I should be told at once."

"My dear," answered Ulysses, "why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it.
I do not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide,
carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never
heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know
nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He
gave me this certain token which I will not hide from you. He said
that a wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing
shovel that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in
the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after
which I was to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven,
one after the other. As for myself, he said that death should come
to me from the sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when
I was full of years and peace of mind, and my people should bless
me. All this, he said, should surely come to pass." 

And Penelope said, "If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier
time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
misfortune." 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches
and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving
the bed chamber woman Eurynome to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed
by torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went
back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and
made the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep
in the cloisters. 

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so
many sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of
wine. Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much
trouble he had himself given to other people. He told her everything,
and she was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till
he had ended his whole story. 

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached
the fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops
and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably
and furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home,
for to his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how
he went on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed
all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.
Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to
the chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet
Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother
who bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard
the wondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks
and terrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed
in safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how
Jove therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all
his men perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at
last he reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso, who kept
him there in a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in
which case she intended making him immortal so that he should never
grow old, but she could not persuade him to let her do so; and how
after much suffering he had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had
treated him as though he had been a god, and sent him back in a ship
to his own country after having given him gold, bronze, and raiment
in great abundance. This was the last thing about which he told her,
for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased the burden of his
sorrows. 

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that
Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On
this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope,
"Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here,
in lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home
though I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we
have at last come together, take care of the property that is in the
house. As for the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten,
I will take many myself by force from other people, and will compel
the Achaeans to make good the rest till they shall have filled all
my yards. I am now going to the wooded lands out in the country to
see my father who has so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself
I will give these instructions, though you have little need of them.
At sunrise it will at once get abroad that I have been killing the
suitors; go upstairs, therefore, and stay there with your women. See
nobody and ask no questions." 

As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus, Philoetius,
and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also. This they
did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they opened the
gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now daylight,
but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led them quickly
out of the town. 
