
So saying he made a ship's cable fast to one of the bearing-posts
that supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around
the building, at a good height, lest any of the women's feet should
touch the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that
has been set for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their
nest, and a terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have
to put their heads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably.
Their feet moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long.

As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner
court. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his
vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they
cut off his hands and his feet. 

When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went
back into the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the
dear old nurse Euryclea, "Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution,
and fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters.
Go, moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants,
and also all the maid servants that are in the house." 

"All that you have said is true," answered Euryclea, "but let me bring
you some clean clothes- a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags
on your back any longer. It is not right." 

"First light me a fire," replied Ulysses. 
She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses
thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;
whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands,
and pressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders
and taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like
to weep, for he remembered every one of them. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXIII

Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her
dear husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and
her feet were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent
over her head to speak to her. "Wake up Penelope, my dear child,"
she exclaimed, "and see with your own eyes something that you have
been wanting this long time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come
home again, and has killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble
in his house, eating up his estate and ill-treating his son."

"My good nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be mad. The gods sometimes
send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish
people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to
you; for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you
thus mock me when I have trouble enough already- talking such nonsense,
and waking me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of
my eyes and closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day
my poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back
again into the women's room; if it had been any one else, who had
woke me up to bring me such absurd news I should have sent her away
with a severe scolding. As it is, your age shall protect you."

"My dear child," answered Euryclea, "I am not mocking you. It is quite
true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger
whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus
knew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father's secret
that he might have his revenge on all these wicked people.

Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea,
and wept for joy. "But my dear nurse," said she, "explain this to
me; if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome
the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there
always were?" 

"I was not there," answered Euryclea, "and do not know; I only heard
them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and huddled
up in a corner of the women's room with the doors closed, till your
son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulysses
standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round
him, one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could
have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and filth,
and looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piled up
in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a
great fire to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call
you, so come with me that you may both be happy together after all;
for now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your
husband is come home to find both wife and son alive and well, and
to take his revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so
badly to him." 

"'My dear nurse," said Penelope, "do not exult too confidently over
all this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses
come home- more particularly myself, and the son who has been born
to both of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some
god who is angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and
has made an end of them; for they respected no man in the whole world,
neither rich nor poor, who came near them, who came near them, and
they have come to a bad end in consequence of their iniquity. Ulysses
is dead far away from the Achaean land; he will never return home
again." 

Then nurse Euryclea said, "My child, what are you talking about? but
you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband
is never coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side
at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I
was washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him,
and I wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not
let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I
will make this bargain with you- if I am deceiving you, you may have
me killed by the most cruel death you can think of." 

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "however wise you may be you can hardly
fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search
of my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man
who has killed them." 

On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband
and question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister,
she sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right
angles [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near
